# Statement Of Work

A Statement of Work (SOW) is a narrative description of the required work. It
stipulates the deliverables or services required to fulfill the contract, and it
defines the task to be accomplished or services to be delivered in clear,
concise and meaningful terms. Examples are by ChatGPT.

Contents:

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Statement of work template](#statement-of-work-template)
  - [Title](#title)
  - [Abstract](#abstract)
  - [Value](#value)
  - [Scope](#scope)
  - [Type](#type)
  - [Payment](#payment)
- [Purpose](#purpose)
  - [Objectives](#objectives)
  - [Performance](#performance)
  - [Factors](#factors)
- [Who does what](#who-does-what)
  - [People](#people)
  - [Roles](#roles)
  - [Responsibilities](#responsibilities)
- [Context](#context)
  - [Past](#past)
  - [Present](#present)
  - [Future](#future)
- [Planning](#planning)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
  - [Specifications](#specifications)
  - [Work breakdown structure (WBS)](#work-breakdown-structure-wbs)
  - [Applicable standards](#applicable-standards)
  - [Technical, operational, and organizational environment](#technical-operational-and-organizational-environment)
  - [Method and source of acceptance](#method-and-source-of-acceptance)
  - [Reporting requirements](#reporting-requirements)
  - [Project management control procedures](#project-management-control-procedures)
  - [Change management procedures](#change-management-procedures)
  - [Ownership of intellectual property](#ownership-of-intellectual-property)
- [Other terms and conditions](#other-terms-and-conditions)
  - [Authorities](#authorities)
  - [Client's obligations](#clients-obligations)
  - [Contractor's obligations](#contractors-obligations)
  - [Location of work, work site, and delivery point](#location-of-work-work-site-and-delivery-point)
  - [Language of work](#language-of-work)
  - [Special requirements](#special-requirements)
  - [Security requirements](#security-requirements)
  - [Insurance requirements](#insurance-requirements)
  - [Expense requirements](#expense-requirements)
- [Schedule](#schedule)
  - [Expected start date and completion date](#expected-start-date-and-completion-date)
  - [Schedule](#schedule-1)
  - [Required resources or types of roles to be performed](#required-resources-or-types-of-roles-to-be-performed)
  - [Applicable documents](#applicable-documents)
  - [Wordbook](#wordbook)
  - [Sign-off](#sign-off)


## Introduction

Wikipedia has good introductions that explain these related concepts:

  * [statement of work (SOW)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statement_of_work)
  * [statement of objectives
    (SOO)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statement_of_objectives)
  * [performance work statement
    (PWS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Performance_work_statement)
  * [contract data requirements list
    (CDRL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contract_data_requirements_list)

The rest of this page is a statement of work template. The template is based on
work by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, at the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, using this [statement of work
document](https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/16/stelprdb1041239.pdf).


## Statement of work template


### Title

The official title of the project.


### Abstract

Summarize the work, ideally in one paragraph.

Include the most-relevant information about the project, objectives, issues,
etc.

Example: This Statement of Work (SOW) outlines the objectives, scope,
deliverables, and timelines for the development and implementation of a new
customer relationship management (CRM) system for XYZ Corporation. The project
aims to enhance client interactions, streamline internal processes, and improve
overall business operations through a customized CRM solution. The vendor will
be responsible for the full lifecycle of the project, including system design,
integration, data migration, user training, and post-implementation support. The
timeline for completion is 12 months, with key milestones and deliverables
identified at each phase. The total budget for the project is $500,000, with
payment schedules linked to the completion of specific deliverables. This SOW
ensures clear expectations, accountability, and performance standards throughout
the duration of the project.


### Value

Summarize the estimated value of the work, ideally in one paragraph.

Include the most-relevant information about costs, including costs of products,
services, materials, etc.

If you prefer to provide more information about the value, then add an appendix
section "Value".

Example: The estimated value of the work outlined in this Statement of Work
(SOW) is $500,000, covering the full scope of the CRM system development and
implementation. This cost includes the design, customization, and integration of
the software, along with data migration, user training, and post-implementation
support. Additionally, the budget accounts for hardware and software licensing
fees, professional services for system configuration, and ongoing maintenance
for the first year. Payments will be made in installments upon the completion of
key milestones, ensuring alignment with project progress and deliverables. Any
potential changes or additional requirements will be assessed and billed
separately, subject to agreement by both parties.


### Scope

Summarize the range of the work, extent of the work, and parameters of the work,
ideally in one paragraph.

Include the most-relevant information about any requirements, such as people,
processes, tools, etc.

If you prefer to provide more information about the value, then add an appendix
section "Scope".

Example: The scope of this project includes the end-to-end development,
customization, and deployment of a CRM system for XYZ Corporation, designed to
improve client management and streamline internal workflows. The work involves
detailed system design and configuration, data migration from legacy systems,
integration with existing software platforms, and user training for
approximately 100 employees across multiple departments. The project will
require collaboration between the vendor’s development team, XYZ Corporation’s
IT department, and key business stakeholders. Tools used will include CRM
software, data migration tools, and training platforms. Additionally, the vendor
will provide post-launch support for a period of six months to address any
system issues or updates. The work will be completed in a phased approach, with
specific deliverables outlined at each stage to ensure project milestones are
met on time.


### Type

Summarize the type of work, ideally in one paragraph.

Include the most-relevant language, such as "This is a work for hire as
described by U.S. California law.".

If you prefer to provide more information about the type, then add an appendix
section "Type".

Example: This is a work-for-hire agreement, as defined under U.S. California
law, wherein the vendor is contracted to deliver a fully customized CRM system
for XYZ Corporation. All intellectual property, including software code,
documentation, and related materials developed during the project, will be owned
by XYZ Corporation upon completion and full payment. The vendor will perform the
work as an independent contractor, adhering to the project’s defined
requirements, milestones, and deadlines, with no employee-employer relationship
established. The vendor is responsible for providing all necessary resources,
including personnel, tools, and equipment, to complete the project, while
ensuring compliance with all applicable laws and regulations during the
development and implementation phases.


### Payment

Summarize the payment for the work, in one paragraph.

Include the most-relevant budget requirements, payment schedule, transfer
methods, etc.

If you prefer to provide more information about the payment, then add an
appendix section "Payment".

Example: The total budget for this project is $500,000, with payments structured
across five key milestones. An initial payment of 20% ($100,000) will be due
upon signing the contract to initiate the project. Subsequent payments will be
made as follows: 30% ($150,000) upon completion of system design and approval,
20% ($100,000) upon successful integration and data migration, 20% ($100,000)
after user training and system testing, and the final 10% ($50,000) upon project
completion and post-launch support handover. Payments will be made via bank
transfer within 15 days of invoice submission, and invoices will be issued upon
the successful completion of each milestone. Any changes to the project scope or
timeline will be subject to additional billing, with prior written approval from
XYZ Corporation.


## Purpose


### Objectives

Describe the objectives of the work: what is to be achieved and delivered by the
completion of the contract.

We recommend [Objectives and Key Results
(OKRs)](http://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/objectives-and-key-results/).

Identify the most relevant goals, outcomes, and intended uses of the completed
work.

Example: The primary objective of this project is to design, develop, and
implement a customized customer relationship management (CRM) system for XYZ
Corporation, aimed at enhancing customer interactions, improving data
management, and streamlining internal workflows. By the completion of the
contract, the following key deliverables will be achieved: a fully integrated
CRM platform, migration of existing client data into the new system,
comprehensive user training for employees, and a seamless transition to ongoing
system support. The CRM system will be configured to meet the specific needs of
various departments, including sales, marketing, and customer service, enabling
improved collaboration, more efficient data access, and enhanced reporting
capabilities. The successful completion of this project will result in increased
operational efficiency, better customer insights, and a more cohesive customer
experience across the organization.


### Performance

Describe the performance of the work: how the work is measured, what performance
indicators are relevant, and what measurements and metrics are relevant.

We recommend [Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs)](http://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/key-performance-indicator/).

Identify the most-relevant performance measurements and metrics, for the
business aspects (e.g. net revenue, customer satisfaction) and for the technical
aspects (e.g. average daily users, percent uptime).

Example: The performance of this project will be measured through a combination
of business and technical indicators to ensure that the CRM system meets both
functional requirements and organizational goals. Performance will be monitored
through regular status meetings, user feedback, and system reports. Adjustments
and optimizations will be made as needed to meet or exceed these agreed-upon
metrics.

Example business performance metrics:

* Customer Satisfaction: A customer satisfaction score of 85% or higher should
  be achieved through internal surveys measuring satisfaction with the CRM’s
  ease of use, functionality, and overall impact on service delivery.

* Net Revenue Impact: The CRM system should contribute to a 15% increase in lead
  conversion rates and a 10% increase in customer retention within the first
  year, as a result of more personalized customer management and streamlined
  processes.

Example system performance metrics:

* Uptime: The CRM system must maintain at least 99.9% uptime during operation to
  ensure business continuity.

* Response Time: System response time should be less than 3 seconds for all user
  actions, other than batch data processing, ensuring smooth user interactions.

* Data Accuracy: Migration of existing customer data must achieve at least 98%
  accuracy with no data loss.

* User Adoption: At least 90% of end-users should be actively using the CRM
  within 30 days post-implementation.


### Factors

Describe the factors that are most-relevant to success of the work.

We recommend [Critical Success Factors
(CSFs)](http://github.com/joelparkerhenderson/critical-success-factor/).

Identify business factors (e.g. personnel availability, budget allocation) and
technical factors (e.g. tool availability, software allocation).

Examples:

* Personnel: Success relies heavily on the availability of qualified and skilled
  personnel, including project managers, subject matter experts, and developers,
  is critical for timely decision-making and issue resolution. Any gaps in
  knowledge or skill sets may lead to delays or suboptimal solutions.

* Budget Allocation and Financial Resources: Adequate funding must be allocated
  at the outset and maintained throughout the duration of the project.
  Insufficient budget allocation can lead to resource constraints, resulting in
  project delays, quality issues, or scope reductions.

* Tool Availability: The timely availability of the necessary tools and software
  platforms is essential for the team to carry out the required tasks
  efficiently. This includes the allocation of licenses, access to development
  environments, current versioning, and any specialized software tools required.

* Stakeholder Engagement: Effective communication with stakeholders is crucial
  for ensuring alignment on objectives, outputs, and outcomes. Regular updates,
  feedback loops, clear roles and responsibilities, and transparency are key to
  managing expectations and addressing concerns as they arise.

* Scope Management: Clear procedures for managing scope changes and project
  adjustments help avoid scope creep and maintain focus on the original project
  objectives. Regular reviews and approval processes for any changes to scope,
  timeline, or budget are essential for successful project delivery. 

* Risk Management: Proactive identification, assessment, and mitigation of risks
  are key to avoiding project disruptions. A well-defined risk management plan,
  including contingency plans for potential issues, ensures the project can
  adapt quickly to unforeseen challenges.

* Time Management: Timely delivery of project milestones and deliverables is
  essential for overall project success. A well-structured project schedule with
  clear deadlines, dependencies, milestones, and progress monitoring is
  necessary to ensure the team remains focused and efficient. 

* Quality Assurance: Ongoing quality assurance processes, including automated
  and manual testing, are vital. A clearly defined testing strategy should be
  followed to detect issues early in the development lifecycle. Current test
  results must be visible to authorized stakeholders.
  
* End-User Adoption: The willingness and ability of end-users to adopt the final
  solution is a critical success factor. This includes proper end-user training,
  end-user testing, and end-user support throughout the adoption process. 


## Who does what


### People

Identify all the people who are involved a.k.a. the participants a.k.a. the
stakeholders.

Include employees, contractors, consultants, partners, vendors, customers,
auditors, investors, advisors, etc., and provide relevant contact information,
such as phone numbers, email addresses, messaging usernames, web links,
availability hours, etc.

We suggest creating a document named "people" that contains this information,
then continuously improving it.


### Roles

Identify the roles that are involved.

Include employee roles, contractor roles, consultant roles, partner roles,
vendor roles, customer roles, auditor roles, investor roles, advisor roles,
etc., and provide relevant role information, such as what the role does, its
capabilities and limits, etc.

We suggest creating a document named "roles" that contains this information,
then continuously improving it.


### Responsibilities

Identify the responsibilities that are involved.

We recommend using a responsibility assignment matrix (RAM) a.k.a. linear
responsibility chart (LRC).

We suggest creating a document named "responsibilities" that contains this
information, then continuously improving it. We use a RAM called a RACIO matrix.
The matrix columns are roles. The matrix rows are areas of responsibility, such
as task groupings. The matrix cells are role-task assignments. A matrix cell
indicates the role-responsibility assignment as one of Responsible, Accountable,
Consultable, Informable, Omittable. A matrix cell may also provide any
assignment notes and details.


## Context


### Past

Describe the context leading up to the work, such as events and circumstances
that led to the need for the work.

Identify any relevant past work, and any of its successes, failures, learnings,
issues, etc.

Identify any relevant past people, such as previous participants, earlier
stakeholders, etc.


### Present

Identify how the work is involved with the overall organization, its objectives,
its projects, and its industry.

Describe the organization, end users, bibliography, references, technical
experts in the field, etc.

Include anything that will assist the contractor in formulating a good bid, and
the client in achieving shared understanding.


### Future

Describe how the work relates to the future, such as of the project,
organization, industry, etc.

Identify any relevant future roadmaps, future objectives, future work, etc.

Identify any relevant future people, such as follow-on participants, potential
upcoming stakeholders, etc.



## Planning


### Requirements

Describe the tasks or activities to be performed by the contractor.

Include a detailed description of what is required for each of the identified
deliverables.

Provide sufficient information so that all parties will be able to understand
what signals completion of a phase, or milestone, or deliverable.

In most situations, this section will identify what methodology and sequence
each of the deliverables will need to meet, how the deliverable will need to be
delivered and what will be the relationship of one deliverable with another.
This section will provide information on the language, format, version and
content requirements for each task or activity and each deliverable or milestone
in the work.

It will also reference the Schedule and Estimated Level of Effort expected for
completion of the work; any Specifications or Standards which will be used; and
the Method and Source of Acceptance which will be applied by the Client to the
deliverables. This information may help to establish a progress payment
schedule.

You may see all this information included in a table and/or text.


### Specifications

Identify the manner in which the work is to be delivered, and to be measured as
completed.

In some cases, the information provided in the Deliverable or the Method and
Source of Acceptance Sections of the SOW will be sufficient.

In other cases, specific reference will be made to the details and qualitative
and quantitative measures which will be used by Client to determine completion
and satisfaction with the work.


### Work breakdown structure (WBS)
 
To be determined.


### Applicable standards

Describe any industry standards that need to be adhered to in fulfilling the
contract.

Identify any guidelines and templates that must be followed or used by the
Contractor in completing the work.

Some relevant examples might be the reference to specific sections of
authoritative sources, governmental regulations, or best-of-breed practices,
peer organization processes, and guidelines.


### Technical, operational, and organizational environment

Provide details on the technical, organizational and operational environment in
which the work will be completed. It is more significant in work where technical
compatibility issues may arise. 

In some cases, it is important to describe in this Section how the work will fit
within other initiatives and who will be the ultimate end user of the
requirement.


### Method and source of acceptance

Provide a description of the performance, quality, format and testing
requirements which will be used to measure whether the work is acceptable or
not.

Example language:

* All deliverables and services rendered under any contract are subject to
  inspection by the Work Authority. Should any deliverables not be to the
  satisfaction of the Work Authority, as submitted, the Work Authority shall
  have the right to reject it or require correction before payment will be
  authorized.

This may also describe quality assurance in terms of processes, goals, automated
testing, user testing, etc.


### Reporting requirements

Describe any performance or status reporting requirements which will be expected
of the Contractor during the life of the Contract. Includes the format,
frequency, number of copies and specific content requirements. It will also
identify the need for presentations, conferences or status meetings, if required
between the Contractor and the Work Authority.


### Project management control procedures

Provide details of how the Work Authority will control the work (progress
meetings, demonstrations, prototypes etc.). It will identify how the payment
schedule will be matched to the measurement of performance throughout the
contract. Contract management and controls in the SOW should be specific to the
work and tasks.

Example language:

* The Work Authority shall ensure the contract will be brought in on time, on
  budget and of an acceptable quality; i.e. submission of progress reports,
  system tests, etc.


### Change management procedures

Provide a description of the process by which any changes to the Scope will be
handled. It clearly defines that no changes will be implemented without first
obtaining the approval of the Contract Authority in writing and as required the
complete processing of a Contract Amendment.

Example language:

* Client does not anticipate any changes to the requirements detailed in this
  SOW. However, if changes do arise they must be done in writing by the Work
  Authority, and an amendment must be prepared to reflect these changes.


### Ownership of intellectual property

Describe who will own any intellectual property created as a result of the
Contract. This may include aspects relating to work-for-hire, confidentiality,
open source, derivative works, etc.

Example language:

* The Intellectual Property will be owned by Client as a work for hire.


## Other terms and conditions


### Authorities

Identify who will perform the role of the Work Authority and the Contracting
Authority and the person who will handle Administration and Invoicing Questions.
It also clarifies how the Contractor is to interact with and obtain direction
from the Work Authority.


### Client's obligations

Identify the access to facilities, the loan or use of Furnished Equipment, the
access to documentation, networks, etc. which Client will provide to the
Contractor. 

The following are examples of the contents that may be included under this
heading:

* Ensure availability of staff with whom the contractor may need to consult.

* Access to the Client's policies, procedures, publications, reports, studies,
  etc.

* Access to appropriate guidelines, standards, industry regulations.
  
* Provide comments on draft reports within five working days from receipt of
  report.

* Schedule events such as meetings, calls, conferences, if required.

* Provide applicable documentation.


### Contractor's obligations

The following are examples of the contents that may be included under this
heading:

* Keep all documents and proprietary information confidential;

* Meet all tasks, deliverables and milestones.

* Return all materials belonging to Client upon completion of the contract.

* Preserve all electronic forms of correspondence (e.g. emails, etc.).

* Submit all written reports as PDF electronic files.

* Participate in events such as a meetings, calls, conferences, as needed.

* Maintain security clearance with no conflict for the duration of the contract.

* Conduct and maintain all documentation in a secure area;


### Location of work, work site, and delivery point

Identify where the work is expected to be completed. This also specifies the
location of hardware and software and where people will meet to perform the
work.

Example language:

* Due to existing workload and deadlines, all personnel assigned to any Contract
  must be ready to work in close and frequent contact with the Client's
  personnel. The work will be performed at the Contractor's location.


### Language of work

Identify if the work must be conducted in a particular language, or languages,
and if so by which role or for which task.


### Special requirements

Indicates if there will be any requirements for special licenses, information on
patents, permits, bonds or import/export details which may be required of either
Party.


### Security requirements

Describe any security requirements and policies that the Contractor will need to
meet in advance of Contract Award, and how the Contractor will need to
demonstrate compliance.

Example language:

* It is a condition that, prior to performance of any obligation under any
  contract, the Contractor and sub-contractors and their employees assigned to
  the performance of such contract will be cleared by the federal government at
  the Reliability level.


### Insurance requirements

Describe any insurance that Client or Contractor may need, or want, or provide,
such as bonding, on-time completion guarantors, etc.

Include any understandings about insurance, such as industry practices, peer
practices, policy coverages, etc.


### Expense requirements

Estimate any expenses and their costs, such as travel expenses, living expenses,
materials expenses, etc.

Include any understandings about expenses, such as limitations, restrictions,
guidances, policies, etc.


## Schedule


### Expected start date and completion date

Identify the period in which the work is to be performed.

More details are provided in the section of the SOW which identify the specific
schedule which will be required for completion of the work.

Example language:

* The services of the Contractor will be required for a period of approximately
  (weeks, months or years), commencing on or about (day, month, year), and with
  expected completion on or about (day, month, year).

This section may also specify allowable time for work, such as number of hours
that can be billed per day, week, month, etc.


### Schedule

To be determined. This section uses the work breakdown structure (WBS) above.


### Required resources or types of roles to be performed

Provide a brief description of the roles to be performed by the Contractor's
resources, if applicable and the specific expertise or minimum requirements for
each role.

Example language:

* Current license from a particular regulatory body.

* Member in good standing with an industry organization.

* Security clearance provided by a specific government agency.
  

### Applicable documents

Append any relevant background documents, drawings, specifications, samples or
information which will be important to demonstrate what, how and when the work
will need to be completed.


### Wordbook

Explain relevant terminology. Provide any reference wordbooks, glossaries,
dictionaries, etc.

Include any initialisms, abbreviations, acronyms, and specialized wording
relevant to the work, the organization, and the industry.

We recommend creating a file named "wordbook" that contains this information,
then continuously improving this file.

Example language:

* SOW: Statement of Work

* OKR: Objective and Key Result

* WBS: Work Breakdown Structure


### Sign-off

The following phrase will appear at the end of each Statement of Work:

NOTE: Before signing the Statement of Work, if you have any questions or
concerns, please call the Work Authority indicated above to negotiate any
issues.

If you agree to the requirements of this Statement of Work, please sign and date
the document which will be accepted as your proposal by Client, and return to my
attention.

Please return an original signature copy by mail.


Printed Name:

__________________________________________


Signature:

__________________________________________


Date:

__________________________________________
